---
title: "[NT] 1. Proofs"
categories:
  - Study
  - 24-2
  - NumberTheory
tags:
  - Number Theory
---

[> Go to Number Theory Contents](../)


# How to prove a statement

## Direct Proof

Direct proof는 다음과 같은 형식 (conditional statement)에 효과적

**[If $P$ then $Q$] or [$P$ implies $Q$] or [$P$ => $Q$]** (called "conditional statement")      

$P$: hypothesis(가정), $Q$: conclusion(결론)   
*만약 $P$이면 $Q$이다* 라는 형태, 이를 "conditional statement"라고 부른다. 


**Prove: Let m and n be integers. If both m and n are odd, then mn is odd.**   
m,n이 정수이고 홀수일 때, mn은 소수 라는 사실을 증명하라   

- Proof: Let "__m, n be integers, and m, n are odd__"
  - State the Hypothesis
- To show: "__mn is odd__"
  - State the Conclusion
   
   
>Integer (정수): $\mathbb{Z} = \lbrace 0, \pm1, \pm2, ...\rbrace$
>\begin{align}
&p + q &\in \mathbb{Z} \text{ }(\text{for any  } p \in \mathbb{Z} \text{ and } q \in \mathbb{Z}) \nonumber\newline     
&pq &\in \mathbb{Z}  \text{ }(\text{for any  } p \in \mathbb{Z} \text{  and  } q \in \mathbb{Z}) \nonumber
\end{align}
   

\begin{align}
\textbf{Given } m, n \in \mathbb{Z}, \nonumber\newline 
m &= 2k+1 &\text{ for some } k &\in \mathbb{Z} \nonumber\newline   
n &= 2l+1 &\text{ for some } l &\in \mathbb{Z} \nonumber\newline   
\end{align}

> for **some**인 이유: 조건이 붙었기 때문에 Any를 사용하면 안된다.

\begin{align}
\textbf{Will show }mn = 2r+1 \text{ for some } r \in \mathbb{Z} \nonumber
\end{align}


\begin{align}
mn &= (2k+1)(2l+1) \nonumber\newline
&= 4kl+2k+2l+1 \nonumber\newline
&= 2(2kl+k+l)+1 \nonumber\newline
\end{align}

\begin{align}
\textbf{Since }k, l \in \mathbb{Z},   r = 2kl+k+l \text{ is in } \mathbb{Z} \nonumber\newline
\textbf{Hence, mn is odd.} \nonumber\newline
\text{Q. E. D.}\nonumber
\end{align}

> Q.E.D.  
Latin   **Quod Erat Demonstrandum**     
"What was to be demonstrated"   
"Thus it was demonstrated"    
증명이 끝났다.      

Direct Proof: Proof by definition   
정의를 충족시킨 후 보여줌으로써 증명


### Example

**Prove: For every integer $n$, the integer $n^2+n$ is even.**

Every integer $n$ -> Conditional Statement (If $n$ is integer, $n^2+n$ is even)   

>Hypothesis: if $n$ is integer (**every** integer $n$)   
Conclusion: $n^2+n$ is even (= $2k$)    

Given: $n \in \mathbb{Z}$   
Will show: $n^2+n=2k$ for some $k \in \mathbb{Z}$   


We needed **Cases**:
- If $n$ is $2m$ for some $m \in \mathbb{Z}$       
  then $n^2+n = (2m)^2+(2m) = 2(2m^2+m) \in \mathbb{Z}$ 
- If $n$ is $2m+1$ for some $m \in \mathbb{Z}$       
  then $n^2+n = (2m+1)^2+(2m+1) = 2(2m^2+3m+1) \in \mathbb{Z}$      

Q. E. D.

### Direct Proof Summary
**Direct Proof**는 **Conditional Statement**에 주로 사용된다.   
Conditional Statement는 **"만약 P일때 Q이다"**의 형태로 나타내는 상태이다.    
정의(definition)에 충족하는 식을 세우고, 계산을 통해 옳다는 것을 증명한다.    
식을 세울때는 Cases로 나눠서 증명한다.

---

## Indirect Proof
Indirect Proof는 **Not conditional statement**에 효과적이다.

> Direct Proof: 정의    
Indirect Proof: 성질

**Prove: There is no smallest positive rational number.**   
rational number: 유리수   

    
Proof: Suppose not.
-> The smallest positive rational number is exist.

Let $q$ be the smallest positive rational number.   
(for some $m, n \in \mathbb{Z}$)    
So $q > 0$ and $q = \frac{m}{n}, n \neq 0$      

$\frac{q}{2} = \frac{m}{2n}$ is such that $\frac{q}{2} > 0$ and $\frac{q}{2}$ is rational number ($m, 2n \in \mathbb{Z}, 2n \neq 0$)    
and $\frac{q}{2} > 0$   
This contradicts the assumtion that **$q$ is the smallest positive rational number**   
**Hence, there is no smallest positive rational number**    
Q. E. D.

### Example
**Prove: Let m and n be integers. Prove that if mn is odd, that both m and n are odd.**     

Proof by Contradiction, Assume $\mathbb{P}$, Suppose ~$\mathbb{Q}$      

> Given(Hyphothesis): $m, n \in \mathbb{Z}$, and $mn = 2k+1$ (for some $k \in \mathbb{Z}$)    
Suppose(Not Conclusion): **either $m$ or $n$ is even.**   

WLOG (without Loss Of Generality, 일반성을 잃지 않고, 문자를 바꿔도 문제가 되지 않을 때 사용), let m be the even integer.     
So, $m=2l$ for some $l \in \mathbb{Z}$    
\begin{align}
\text{Then } mn &= (2l)n \nonumber\newline
&= 2(ln) \quad (ln \in \mathbb{Z}) \nonumber
\end{align}

$\therefore mn$ is even.    
This Contradicts our assumption that **mn is odd.**   
Q. E. D.

## Indirect proof Proving the contrapositive
**Not P then Not Q**

Let $x$ be a positive real number. Prove that if x is irrational, then is $\sqrt{x}$ irrational    
$x$를 양의 실수라고 가정. $x$가 유리수가 아닐 때, $\sqrt{x}$는 유리수가 아니다.   
Proof: Will show **~Q => ~P**

> Grand Assumsion: $x$ be a positive real number (대전제는 건들지 않는다.)   
$\mathbb{P}$: $x$ is irrational   
$\mathbb{Q}$: $\sqrt{x}$ is irrational    
== Direct Proof.    


> Given: $x > 0, x \in \mathbb{Z}$    
$\quad\quad$ and $\sqrt{x} = \frac{m}{n}, $ for some $m, n \in \mathbb{Z}, n \neq 0$    
Will show: $x$ is rational    

Since $x > 0, \sqrt{x^2} = x = \frac{m^2}{n^2}$, and $m^2, n^2 \in \mathbb{Z}, n^2 \neq 0$    

Q. E. D

### Example
**Suppose the points ($x_1, y_1$) and ($x_2, y_2$) each satisfy the equation $y = mx + b$**   
**Prove that if $y_1 \neq y_2$, then $x_1 \neq x_2$**
> 1. This is **conditonal statement**   
2. Proof by contrapositive: uses $\mathbb{P}\Rightarrow\mathbb{Q}$ is equivalent to $\sim\mathbb{Q}\Rightarrow\sim\mathbb{P}$   
3. Leave grand assume as it is    
but assume $x_1=x_2=\sim\mathbb{Q}$     
and show $y_1=y_2=\sim\mathbb{P}$     
4. Difference between "Contradiction" and "Contrapositive"    
Contradiction: **Leave $\mathbb{P}$ and Suppose $\sim\mathbb{Q}$** (direct proof)      
Contraposivite: **Prove another new conditional statement $\sim\mathbb{Q}\Rightarrow\sim\mathbb{P}$** (indirect proof)    

($x_1, y_1$) and ($x_2, y_2$) both satisfy    
$y_1 = mx_1+b$ and    
$y_2 = mx_2+b$    
Assume $x_1 = x_2$
\begin{align}
mx_1 &= mx_2 \nonumber\newline
mx_1+b &= mx_2+b \nonumber
\end{align}   
So, $y_1=y_2$   
Q. E. D.


# Practice Problem 
Consider the following statement:   
**For an integer $n$, if $n^2$ is even, then $n$ is even.**    
(a) Explain why the indirect proof would work better to prove this statement.     
Grand assume: $n \in \mathbb{Z}$    
$\mathbb{P}$: $n^2$ is even   
$\mathbb{Q}$: $n$ is even
$\mathbb{P} \Rightarrow \mathbb{Q}$를 증명하려면 복잡한 수식이 필요. $n^2$을 n으로 만들었을 때 짝수가 되는것을 증명하는 것 보다 $n$이 홀수일 때 $n^2$가 홀수라는 것을 증명하는 것이 쉽다.
      
(b) Prove the statement by contradiction.          
Let $n^2=2k$, find $n = 2m-1$   
$n^2 = n \times n = (2m-1) \time (2m-1) = 4m^2-4m+1 = 2(2m^2-2m)+1$   
so if n is even, then n^2 is even.        

(c) Prove the statement by contrapositive. 
Let $n = 2m-1$, prove $n^2=2k-1$    
$n^2 = n \times n = (2m-1) \times (2m-1) = 4m^2-4m+1 = 2(2m^2-2m+1)-1$     